---
title: "Research conducted on ExCL and presented at SC25"
toc: true
toc_sticky: false
categories: [ExCL]
tags: [Presentations]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
header:
    image: /assets/images/sc25-header.jpg
    teaser: /assets/images/sc25-teaser.jpg
mojo:
    - url: /assets/images/Tatiana-WACCPD.jpg
      image_path: /assets/images/Tatiana-WACCPD-th.jpg
      alt: "Tatiana presented to a full house."
      title: "Tatiana presented to a full house."
    - url: /assets/images/Tatiana-WACCPD3.jpg
      image_path: /assets/images/Tatiana-WACCPD3-th.jpg
      alt: "Tatiana’s presentation featuring ExCL on the slide."
      title: "Tatiana’s presentation featuring ExCL on the slide."
    - url: /assets/images/Tatiana-best-paper.jpg
      image_path: /assets/images/Tatiana-best-paper-th.jpg
      alt: "MLIR Best paper award."
      title: "MLIR Best paper award."
    - url: /assets/images/chathpc-for-kokkos.jpg
      image_path: /assets/images/chathpc-for-kokkos.jpg
      alt: "Pedro presenting ChatHPC."
      title: "Pedro presenting ChatHPC."
---

<!--more-->

## 🏆 Best Paper Recognition at WACCPD

SULI Intern Tatiana Melnichenko (University of Tennessee, Knoxville) was part of the team awarded Best Paper at the Twelfth Workshop on Accelerator Programming and Directives (WACCPD 2025) workshop. She presented the work to a packed room, and highlighted ExCL’s role in enabling the evaluation of Mojo’s vendor-neutral programming capabilities across NVIDIA H100 and AMD MI300A GPUs for science workloads. Tatiana will be returning for a part-time internship in the spring, continuing her contributions with ORNL researchers.

[Mojo: MLIR-based Performance-Portable HPC Science Kernels on GPUs for the Python Ecosystem](https://doi.org/10.1145/3731599.3767573), William Godoy, Tatiana Melnichenko, Pedro Valero-Lara, Wael Elwasif, Philip Fackler, Rafael Ferreira Da Silva, Keita Teranishi, Jeffrey Vetter, *SC '25: Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis*, 2025.

## 🎓 ACM Undergraduate Research Competition Finalists

Tatiana’s [poster](https://sc25.conference-program.com/presentation/?id=post151&sess=sess529) was selected as a Top 5 finalist in the ACM Undergraduate Research Competition, underscoring the strength of internship engagement in ExCL-supported projects.

## 🥉 3rd Place ACM SRC Poster Award

Matthew Chung, mentored by Narasinga Rao, earned 3rd place in the ACM Undergraduate Research Poster Competition for his [poster](https://sc25.conference-program.com/presentation/?id=post230&sess=sess529) on a Heterogeneous Eigen solver using IRIS and conducted on ExCL systems.

## 🧠 SC Best Poster Nomination

A [poster](https://sc25.conference-program.com/presentation/?id=post267&sess=sess527) on Julia with an Intelligent Runtime System, presented by Narasinga Rao, Pedro Valero Lara, William Godoy, Keita Teranishi, and Jeffrey Vetter, was nominated for Best Poster at SC25. The work explored dynamic optimization strategies for heterogeneous systems.

## 📄 ChatHPC and ChatPort Papers

Two papers---ChatHPC and ChatPort---were presented on how AI capabilities can leverage and speed up the HPC software development process. Researchers used ExCL capabilities to fine-tune CodeLlama with libraries that are critical to DOE HPC mission (Kokkos, OpenMP, ADIOS2, IRIS, TAU).

* [ChatHPC: Building the Foundations for a Productive and Trustworthy AI-Assisted HPC Ecosystem](https://doi.org/10.1145/3712285.3759787), Pedro Valero Lara, Aaron Young, Jeffrey S. Vetter, Zheming Jin, Swaroop Pophale, Mohammad Alaul Haque Monil, Keita Teranishi, William F. Godoy, *SC '25: Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis*, 2025.
* [Enhancing ChatPORT with CUDA-to-SYCL Kernel Translation Capability](https://doi.org/10.1145/3731599.3767398), Zheming Jin, Swaroop Pophale, Keita Teranishi, *SC-W'25: Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis Workshops*, 2025.

## 🎤 Short talks at workshops

Philip W. Fackler gave a short talk titled *Speeding Up Phonon Dynamic Structure Factor Calculations in Phonopy with GPU-Accelerated Computing* as part of the [XLOOP 2025 workshop](https://wordpress.cels.anl.gov/xloop-2025/workshop-schedule/).

William Godoy gave a talk titled *A first look at Mojo’s MLIR-based Performance Portable GPU Programming for Python Users* at the [Python HPPSS workshop](https://hppss.github.io/SC25/schedule.html#a-first-look-at-mojos-mlir-based-performance-portable-gpu-programming-for-python-users).

## 📒 BoF and Tutorials

Philip W. Fackler and William Godoy presented at the Julia for HPC [BoF](https://sc25.conference-program.com/presentation/?id=bof116&sess=sess480) and half-day [Tutorial](https://sc25.conference-program.com/presentation/?id=tut140&sess=sess268). ExCL resources were used for the readiness of the presented software at these events, including CI services for the [JACC.jl](https://github.com/JuliaORNL/JACC.jl) performance portable Julia library developed at ORNL.

{% include gallery id="mojo" caption="Pictures from SC25" %}